This essay relates Alex’s story in A Clockwork Orange (1962) to Anthony
Burgess’s thinking about the novel as a formal genre. Burgess maintained that
the novel is ‘a humane form’: it is uniquely suited to depict human psychology
and action, but it is ill-equipped to represent the abstract and complexly
mediated dynamics of institutional authority and agency.1 If the latter drain
each citizen of his or her capacity to think and act freely, then the novel may
cease to exist. As Burgess put it, ‘I don’t think it’s possible to produce fiction in
a community which does not accept the importance of individuality’.2 Thus, for
Burgess, Alex’s fate in A Clockwork Orange is tied to that of the novel. In maintaining his individual self despite government efforts to erase it, Alex defends
the raw human material that Burgess sees as necessary for the survival of
fiction.
Still, Burgess failed to consider that impersonal institutions — whether
political, legal, cultural, or economic — often neutralize threats to their
 authority by defining the terms of resistance that could be used against them.
For example, Alex commits assault, rape, and murder in order to demonstrate
his freedom from government and legal control, arguing:
the not-self cannot have the bad, meaning they of the government and the judges and
the schools cannot allow the bad because they cannot allow the self. And is not our
modern history, my brothers, the story of brave malenky selves fighting these big
machines?3
Alex believes he is a freedom fighter, but government and police officials label
him a juvenile delinquent. Moreover, they use the threat of juvenile delinquency to introduce the Ludovico treatment, a behavioural conditioning
 technique that will help to shore up state power and, as F. Alexander puts it,
clear a path for the ‘full apparatus of totalitarianism’ (p. 179). Alex’s crimes,
therefore, represent local moments of autonomy from political and legal forces
that, paradoxically, serve to strengthen these very forces. 